Clustering 
 Outline 

 L } Overview of Clustering 

 LJ Major Clustering Approaches 
 LJ K - means Clustering 
 LJ Hierarchical Clustering 
 Li DBSCAN Clustering 

 LJ Cluster Evaluation 

 Density - based Clustering 
 e Density - based methods use density to discover clusters of any shape . 
 e Density means the concentration of data points in a given region . 
 e Clusters are regions of high density separated by regions of low density . 
 e Major features : 
 = Discover clusters of arbitrary shape 

 = Handle noise 

 m 
 = No need to define the number of clusters in advance 

 DBSCAN Clustering 

 e DBSCAN : Density - Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise 
 e lt defines a cluster as a maximal set of density - connected points . 
 Density is the number of data points within a certain radius . 
 The parameters of this algorithm are : 
 » € the maximum radius of the neighborhood 

 s » 
 the minimal number of point in a dense neighborhood 
 € -neighborhood 

 e 
 The neighborhood within a radius € of a given object is called 

 the € -neighborhood of the object . 


 Core objects 
 If the ¢-neighborhood of an object contains at least a minimum 

 number of objects MinPts , then the object is called a core object . 
 Core , Border , and Noise Points 
 Acore point has at least a specified number of points ( MinPts ) within € 
 Aborder point is not a core point , but is in the neighborhood of a core point 

 e 
 Given a set of objects D , we say that an object p is directly 

 density - reachable from an object q if : 

 “ p is within the € -neighborhood of g , and q is a core object . 
 Given a set of objects D , an object p is density - reachable from an 

 object q with respect to € and MinPts if : 

 “ There is a chain of objects p , , ... , p , , where p , = q and p , = p such 
 that p. , , is directly density - reachable from p , with respect to € and 

 MinPts , for 1SiSn and p,€ D. ” 

 MinPts= 5 

 Density Connectivity 

 e 
 Given a set of objects D , an object p is density - connected to 

 an object q with respect to € and MinPts if : 
 “ There is an object o € D such that both p and q are 

 density - reachable from o with respect to ¢ and MinPts ” 
 MinPts = 5 

 Density - based Clusters 
 e Adensity - based cluster is a set of density - connected points 

 that is maximal with respect to density - reachability . 
 Every object not contained in any cluster is considered noise . 
 e e 
 ie ee * . 
 > eo Pe 

 SA 
 ‘ iad Pa * 

 Sore 

 4 


 DBSCAN Algorithm : Intuition 
 “ By recursively exploring the neighborhood of core points 
 within the ¢-distance threshold and incorporating reachable 
 points into clusters , the DBSCAN algorithm identifies dense 

 regions in the dataset while also detecting outliers ( noise 

 points ) that do not fit within these dense regions . ” 

 - 2 N 

 DBSCAN Algorithm 

 Choose € ( a positive number ) and MinPoints ( a natural number ) . 
 Select an arbitrary point P from the dataset . 
 Check if point P is a core point . 
 If yes , form a cluster including P. 
 Recursively add core points within the € -neighborhood of the already added 
 points to the cluster . 
 Noise Identification : Label points that are neither core points nor border 
 points as noise . 
 Determining MinPts 
 General guidelines for setting MinPts : 
 e Larger datasets require a larger MinPts value . 
 In noisier datasets , choose a larger MinPts value . 
 Domain knowledge is crucial to select an appropriate MinPts value . 
 16 

 DBSCAN : Determining € using K - Distance Plot 
 Plot these K - distances in ascending order . 
 e The ' knee ' in the plot represents a threshold where a sharp change in 

 distance occurs . 
 This point is indicative of the optimal € value . 
 Helps to distinguish between core , border , and noise points in the data 
 17 
 DBSCAN : Determining € and MinPts 

 e Idea : for points in a cluster , their Ath nearest neighbors are at close distance 
 e 
 Noise points have the Ath nearest neighbor at farther distance 

 e 
 Advantages 
 Disadvantages 
 e Advantages : 
 m Can handle clusters of different shapes and sizes 
 = Resistant to noise and outliers 
 = Does n't require predefined number of clusters .