Course 
 « Computer Vision » 
 Sid - Ahmed Berrani 
 2024 - 2025 
 1 
 Images formation 
 • Almost all the computer vision topics requires the concept of “ image ” 
 • 
 In other terms , to apply computer vision techniques , we need images 
 2 
 Images formation : 
 All starts with light ... 
 • To being able to see any 3D scene , our eyes or a digital camera needs to 
 capture the light radiation reflected from scene surfaces 
 • 
 3 
 Images Formation : 
 The nature of light 
 Light has a dual nature : 
 1 . Can behave like a particle ( photon ) 
 • Travels in a straight line 
 • Light can reflect off a mirror and cast shadows 
 • Consists of tiny bits of energy behaving like discrete packets 
 A photon is an elementary particle that represents a quantum of light or other electromagnetic 
 radiation . 
 It has no mass , always moves at the speed of light in a vacuum , and carries energy and 
 momentum . 
 An example is how a straw appears bent when placed in a glass of 
 water . 
 Formation : 
 The nature of light 
 Light 
 has a dual nature : 
 6 
 Images Formation : 
 The nature of light 
 Light has a dual nature : 
 Images Formation : Visible light is part of 
 electromagnetic spectrum 
 The electromagnetic spectrum can be expressed in terms of wavelength ( 𝛌 ) or frequency ( 𝛎 ) 
 8 
 Images Formation : Light and Perception 
 • The colors that humans perceive in an object are determined by the nature of 
 the light reflected from the object : 
 • A white object reflects light uniformly among visible wavelengths 
 • Green objects reflect light primarily in the 500 - 570 nm range . 
 • Quantities that are usually used to describe a light source : 
 • Radiance 
 • Luminance 
 • Brightness 
 9 
 Images Formation : Light and Perception 
 • 
 Quantities 
 are usually used to describe a light source 
 • Radiance 
 • Luminance 
 • Brightness 
 10 
 Images Formation : Light and Perception 
 • Quantities that are usually used to describe a light source : 
 • Radiance 
 • Luminance 
 • Brightness 
 Brightness is a subjective descriptor of light “ intensity ” and is one of the key factors 
 in describing color sensation . 
 Luminance of the inner square is exactly the same . 
 Perceived brightness is different . 
 11 
 Images Formation : The BRDF model 
 • When light hits a surface it is scattered and reflected . 
 The most general 
 way to model this interaction is through a 5 - dimensional function called 
 BRDF ( Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function ) . 
 12 
 Images formation : Cameras 
 • Image are captured using cameras 
 • 
 • Camera obscura ( dark chamber ) does not have lenses - It has a pinhole . 
 13 
 Images formation : The Pinhole Camera Model 
 • 
 Imaging device : Let ’s try to build a simple image device 
 We are unable to get a reasonable image . 
 14 
 Images formation : The Pinhole Camera Model 
 • 
 Camera obscura : 
 Key idea : Put a barrier with a small hole ( aperture ) between the object and the sensor 
 Blurring is reduced ! 
 But the aperture should be as small as possible . 
 This is also known as pinhole camera . 
 15 
 Images formation : The Pinhole Camera Model 
 • 
 Camera obscura : 
 Images formation : The Pinhole Camera Model 
 • Camera Obscura : 
 If the facade of a building , or a place , or a landscape is illuminated by the 
 sun and a small hole is drilled in the wall of a room in a building facing 
 this , which is not directly lighted by the sun , then all objects illuminated 
 by the sun will send their images through this aperture and will appear , 
 upside down , on the wall facing the hole . 
 You will catch these pictures on 
 a piece of white paper , which placed vertically in the room not far from 
 that opening , and you will see all the above - mentioned objects on this 
 paper in their natural shapes or colors , but they will appear smaller and 
 upside down , on account of crossing of the rays at that aperture . 
 If 
 these pictures originate from a place which is illuminated by the sun 
 , 
 they will appear colored on the paper exactly as they are . 
 The paper 
 should be very thin and must be viewed from the back . 
 17 
 Images formation : The Pinhole Camera Model 
 • 
 Camera obscura : How small must be the pinhole ? 
 Large pinhole : 
 Rays are mixed up - > Blurring ! 
 Small pinhole : 
 We gain focus , but 
 • Less light passes through ( long exposure time ) 
 • Diffraction effect ( we lost focus again ! ) 
 18 
 Images formation : The Pinhole Camera Model 
 • 
 Camera obscura : How small must be the pinhole ? 
 Images Formation : Digital image sensing 
 • Incoming light radiation reflected from a 3D scene is transformed to a voltage by 
 an imaging sensor that is sensible to a specific type of energy ( wavelength ) . 
 • 
 Usually , sensors are arranged in linear or 2D arrays 
 20 
 Images Formation : Digital image sensing 
 • 
 Light falling on an imaging sensor is usually picked up by an active sensing area , 
 integrating for the duration of the exposure , and then passed to a set of sense 
 amplifiers . 
 • 
 CMOS is in general better but CCD is faster and works better in low light . 
 • Today , CMOS is used in most digital cameras 
 22 
 Images Formation Process 
 • 
 The sensor array , coincident with the focal plane of the lens , produces outputs 
 proportional to the integral of the light received at each sensor for a certain 
 amount of time . 
 Images Formation : Image Function 
 An image can be modelled as a function : 
 2 
 𝐼 ∶ Ω ⊂ ℝ ⟶ ℝ 
 The domain is a ( usually rectangular ) subset of the real image plane . 
 𝐼 𝑥 , 𝑦 
 is proportional to the amount of light energy that is collected at the 
 image plane at coordinates x , y. 
 The amount of energy is called intensity . 
 Images Formation : Sampling and Quantization 
 A continuous real image is converted into a digital one through a process of 
 sampling and quantization . 
 • Sampling : Reduces the image domain to a finite set of spatial coordinates . 
 ℝ2 ⟶ 𝑀 × 𝑁 
 • Quantization : Reduces the sensor response ( function codomain ) to a finite set 
 of values . 
 To sampling the continuous image domain into a finite set of values we usually 
 consider an equi - spaced grid of values in a given area ( matrix ) . 
 • This reflect the regular arrangement of cells in a CMOS or CCD sensor . 
 • Each sample is called a pixel . 
 26 
 Images Formation : Quantization 
 • The intensity ( output ) of the function must also be discretized ( quantized ) in a 
 finite set of values to be digitized and used in a computer . 
 • 
 Image codomain is divided into a set of values and each f(x , y ) is rounded to the 
 closest one . 
 Images Formation : Sampling and Quantization 
 Digital Images 
 Digital Images 
 • Intensity and Matrix representation are the most common to be used in practice . 
 • M , N are related to the spatial resolution of an image . 
 • L is related to the intensity resolution . 
 Digital Images : Spatial Resolution 
 • Spatial resolution is a measure of the smallest discernible detail in an image . 
 • Usually defined as dots ( pixels ) per unit distance . 
 • To be meaningful , measures of spatial resolution must be stated with respect to 
 spatial units . 
 • A 1024x1024 pixel image is not meaningful without stating the spatial dimensions 
 encompassed by the image ( the size of each pixel in the 3D world ) . 
 31 
 Digital Images : Spatial Resolution 
 • 
 The number of pixels of an image directly affect spatial resolution only with 
 comparable lenses and if the subjects are taken at the same distance . 
 Digital Images : Spatial Resolution 
 33 
 Digital Images : 
 Intensity resolution 
 • Intensity resolution refers to the smallest discernible change in intensity level . 
 Digital Images : Few Definitions 
 • Dynamic range of an imaging system : 
 The ratio of the maximum measurable intensity to the minimum detectable intensity level . 
 Depends by the number of bits we use and establish the lowest and highest intensity levels 
 that a system can represent . 
 • A high dynamic range ( HDR ) image preserves details in both the shadows and highlights . 
 • A low dynamic range ( LDR ) image loses details in either the dark or bright areas . 
 Digital Images : Few Definitions 
 • Contrast : 
 The difference between the highest and the lowest intensity levels of an 
 image . 
 • 
 Even if we use techniques to acquire images at high dynamic range , we will 
 probably will not be able to display it on a computer screen ... 
 • Compromises have to be done in the acquisition process to either discard dark 
 details or saturate heavily illuminated areas . 
 36 
 Dynamic range vs. Intensity resolution 
 Dynamic range and intensity resolution in a digital image both relate to how brightness levels are 
 represented , but they refer to different aspects of image quality : 
 • Dynamic Range refers to the ratio between the brightest and darkest intensities that a system ( such as 
 a camera or a display ) can capture or reproduce . 
 A higher dynamic range means better detail in both very bright and very dark areas of the image . 
 Example : HDR ( High Dynamic Range ) imaging captures a wider range of light intensities compared 
 to standard images . 
 • Intensity Resolution ( Bit Depth ) refers to the number of discrete levels used to represent pixel 
 intensities in a digital image . 
 A higher intensity resolution allows for smoother transitions between brightness levels and 
 reduces banding artifacts . 
 37 
 Dynamic range 
 • Left ( High Dynamic Range - HDR ): 
 Preserves details in both the shadows 
 and highlights , making the scene appear 
 more natural and well - balanced . 
 • Right ( Low Dynamic Range - LDR ): 
 Shadows are too dark , and highlights are 
 overexposed , leading to a loss of details 
 in the brightest and darkest areas . 
 38 
 Dynamic range 
 39 
 Dynamic range 
 high_dynamic_range [ 0 , 255 ] low dynamic range by clipping intensities [ 75 , 175 ] 
 low dynamic range by clipping intensities [ 100 , 150 ] low dynamic range by clipping intensities [ 120 , 130 ] 
 40 
 Intensity resolution 
 41